Pangeo training material for Big data geosciences (#3147)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/climate/tutorials/pangeo-notebook/tutorial.md

tags:
  - pangeo
  - interactive-tools
  - jupyter-notebook
contributors:
- annefou
notebook:
  language: python
  snippet: topics/climate/tutorials/pangeo-notebook/preamble.md
---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

In this tutorial, we will learn about [Xarray](https://xarray.pydata.org/), one of the most used Python library from the [Pangeo](https://pangeo.io/) ecosystem. 

We will be using data from [Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service](https://ads.atmosphere.copernicus.eu/)
and more precisely PM2.5 ([Particle Matter < 2.5 μm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Particulates#Size,_shape_and_solubility_matter)) 4 days forecast from December, 22 2021. Parallel data analysis with Pangeo is not covered in this tutorial. 

> ### {% icon comment %} Remark
>
> This tutorial uses data on a regular latitude-longitude grid. More complex and irregular grids are not discussed in this tutorial. In addition,
> this tutorial is not meant to cover all the different possibilities offered by Xarrays but shows functionalities we find useful for day to day
> analysis.
>
{: .comment}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

> # Analysis

Reviewer: maybe a short paragraph mentioning that we will use the`interactive_tool_pangeo_notebook`  tool Then launching a Python 3 kernel?

> # Analysis

Author: Yes it is added (you need to look at the rendered version). Some kind of "magic":
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8168508/154761386-d78351e3-d6f1-4b06-9f63-0df2583fec15.png)

> # Analysis

Reviewer: perfect! Duno why I don't see mention of these magic content on the md file.. but ok, thanks for the screenshots! I can continue!!

> # Analysis

Reviewer: .. I was searching on zenodo in case of.. but don't see it on the Galaxy training dedicated space, now I understand why ;) data is not on this Zenodo space! OK for me!!!

> # Analysis

Author: I am not fully sure (that's why I say it is magic!). I think it is based on the the tags we define at the top.

## Import Python packages

Some packages may need to be installed first. For example `cmcrameri` is missing, so we need to install it by entering the following command in a new cell of your Jupyter Notebook:

```python

> pip install cmcrameri

Reviewer: after executing it, a message "Note: you may need to restart the kernel to use updated packages." is displayed. Is it automatically made or no need to restart the kernel? Or we need to add a comment to indicate there is a need to restart manually the kernel?

```

Then we need to import all the necessary packages in our Jupyter Notebook.

```python
import numpy as np
import xarray as xr
import cartopy.crs as ccrs
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import cmcrameri.cm as cmc
import pandas as pd
```

> In case some packages cannot be imported you need to install them first. For example if cmcrameri is missing and you get an error, type and run `pip install cmcrameri` in a new notebook cell, then re-execute the cell in your Jupyter Notebook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case some packages cannot be imported you need to install them first. For example if xarray is missing and you get an error, type and run `pip install xarray` in a new notebook cell, then re-execute the cell in your Jupyter Notebook.
```

Reviewer: as in fact the cmcrameri instal command is executed before this step. Alternatively we can just delete this sentence "For example if cmcrameri is missing and you get an error, type and run `pip install cmcrameri` in a new notebook cell, then re-execute the cell in your Jupyter Notebook."

Author: Yes. I think we can remove it. Thanks

## Open and read metadata

The netCDF dataset can now be opened with Xarray:

```python

> dset = xr.open_dataset("data/CAMS-PM2_5-20211222.netcdf")

Reviewer: hmmm it seems there is something lacking before this step to import the data no?

```python
print(dset)
```

Below is what you should get if everything goes fine.

> ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> ```
>  <xarray.Dataset>
>  Dimensions:     (longitude: 700, latitude: 400, level: 1, time: 97)
>  Coordinates:
>    * longitude   (longitude) float32 -24.95 -24.85 -24.75 ... 44.75 44.85 44.95
>    * latitude    (latitude) float32 69.95 69.85 69.75 69.65 ... 30.25 30.15 30.05
>    * level       (level) float32 0.0
>    * time        (time) timedelta64[ns] 00:00:00 01:00:00 ... 4 days 00:00:00
> Data variables:
>   pm2p5_conc  (time, level, latitude, longitude) float32 0.4202 ... 7.501
> Attributes:
>   title:        PM25 Air Pollutant FORECAST at the Surface
>   institution:  Data produced by Meteo France
>   source:       Data from ENSEMBLE model
>   history:      Model ENSEMBLE FORECAST
>   FORECAST:     Europe, 20211222+[0H_96H]
>   summary:      ENSEMBLE model hourly FORECAST of PM25 concentration at the...
>   project:      MACC-RAQ (http://macc-raq.gmes-atmosphere.eu)
> ```
{: .code-out}

> ### {% icon tip %} Command not found
> If you get an error with the previous command, first check the location of the input file `CAMS-PM2_5-20211222.netcdf`:

> > it needs to be in the smae directory than your Jupyter Notebook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> it needs to be in the same directory as your Jupyter Notebook.
```

> > > ```python
> > > print(dset.pm2p5_conc)
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> > > ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> > > ```bash
> > >    <xarray.DataArray 'pm2p5_conc' (time: 97, level: 1, latitude: 400, longitude: 700)>
> > >    [27160000 values with dtype=float32]
> > >    Coordinates:
> > >      * longitude  (longitude) float32 335.0 335.1 335.2 335.4 ... 44.75 44.85 44.95
> > >      * latitude   (latitude) float32 69.95 69.85 69.75 69.65 ... 30.25 30.15 30.05
> > >      * level      (level) float32 0.0
> > >      * time       (time) timedelta64[ns] 00:00:00 01:00:00 ... 4 days 00:00:00
> > >    Attributes:
> > >        species:        PM2.5 Aerosol
> > >        units:          µg/m3
> > >        value:          hourly values
> > >        standard_name:  mass_concentration_of_pm2p5_ambient_aerosol_in_air
> > > ```
> > {: .code-out}
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> ### {% icon comment %} Different ways to access Data variables
>
> To access a variable or coordinate, we can use "." or specify its name as a string between squared brackets "[" "]". For example:
>
> ```python
> print(dset['pm2p5_conc'])
> # or alternatively
> print(dset.pm2p5_conc)
> ```
> 

> > When we print a variable or coordinate, we don't get all the individual values but a `DataArray` that contains a lot of very useful metadata such as coordinates (if they have some), all the attributes such as the name, the physical units, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When we print a variable or coordinate, we do not get all the individual values but a `DataArray` that contains a lot of very useful metadata such as coordinates (if they have some), all the attributes such as the name, the physical units, etc.
```

>
{: .comment}
## Select / Subset from coordinates

We often want to select elements from the coordinates for instance to subset a geographical area or select specific times or a specific time range.

> There are two different ways to select:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two different ways to make a selection:
```

- by index
- by value

### Select elements from coordinate by index

```python
print(dset.isel(time=0))
```

You should see that the coordinate `time` "disappeared" from the `Dimensions` and now the variable `pm2p5_conc` is a 3D field with longitude, latitude and level.

### Select elements from coordinates by value

> When selecting elements by the value of the coordinate, we need to use the same datatype. For instance, to select and element from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When selecting elements by the value of the coordinate, we need to use the same datatype. For instance, to select an element from
```

Let's shift the longitudes by 180 degrees so that they come in the range of -180 to 180.

### Shift longitudes

We print the longitudes before and after shifting them so we can see what is happening.

```python
print(dset.longitude)
```

The longitude values are between `335.05` and `44.95` degrees.

Let's now shift the longitudes to get values between `-180`, `180` degrees.

```python
dset.coords['longitude'] = (dset['longitude'] + 180) % 360 - 180
print(dset.longitude)
```

Indeed, the longitudes have been shifted and now the values are between `-24.95` and `44.95`.

### Visualize on a map PM2.5 for December, 24th 2021 at 12:00 UTC

```python
dset.sel(time=(np.timedelta64(2,'D')+ np.timedelta64(12,'h'))).pm2p5_conc.plot()
```
We will get a figure like the one below:

![CAMS PM2.5 December, 24th 2021 at 12:00 UTC](../../images/PM2_5_default.png)

> ### {% icon comment %} What about `level`
> Note that in the previous plot, we did not need to select `level` because there is one value only. However, if we had more than one level, we would need to add a selection on the level before plotting
>
{: .comment}

### Customize your plot

> There are many ways to customize your plots and here we only give you what we think is important for creating publication ready figures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to customize your plots will only detail what we think is important for creating publication ready figures:
```

```python
print(dset.sel(latitude=slice(43., 40.), longitude=slice(11.,15.)).mean())
```

> ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> ```bash
> <xarray.Dataset>
> Dimensions:     ()
>  Data variables:
>     pm2p5_conc  float32 9.118
>```
{: .code-out}

> ### {% icon question %} Maximum PM2.5 over Italy
>
> What is the maximum forecasted PM2.5 value over the Rome-Naples region?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >  We  select the same sub-area: 11. East to 15.0 East and 40. N to 43. N and compute the maximum with `max`. The maximum PM2.5 value is **59.13694382** μm.m-3 (that is rounded to **59.14**).
> >
> > > ### {% icon code-in %} Input: Python
> > > ```python
> > > dset.sel(latitude=slice(43., 40.), longitude=slice(11.,15.)).max()
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> > > ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> > > ```bash
> > > xarray.Dataset
> > > Dimensions:
> > > Coordinates: (0)
> > > Data variables:
> > > pm2p5_conc
> > > ()
> > > float64
> > > 59.14
> > > array(59.13694382)
> > > Attributes: (0)
> > > ```
> > {: .code-out}
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> ### {% icon question %} Find when the maximum PM2.5 is forecasted
>

> > When is forecasted the maximum PM2.5 value?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When is the maximum PM2.5 value forecasted?
```

>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > We will select a sub-area: 11. East to 15.0 East and 40. N to 43. N and average over the entire selected area and search where the maximum PM2.5 value of 59.13694382 μm.m-3 is found. The maximum PM2.5 value occurs on 2021-12-22 at 20:00 UTC.
> >
> > > ### {% icon code-in %} Input: Python
> > > ```python
> > > dset_tmean = dset.sel(latitude=slice(43., 40.), longitude=slice(11.,15.)).max(dim=('latitude', 'longitude'))
> > > dset_tmean_max = dset_tmean.where(dset_tmean['pm2p5_conc'] == 59.13694382, drop=True)
> > > print(dset_tmean_max)
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> > > ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> > > ```bash
> > > <xarray.Dataset>
> > > Dimensions:     (time: 1, level: 1)
> > > Coordinates:
> > >   * level       (level) float32 0.0
> > >   * time        (time) timedelta64[ns] 20:00:00
> > > Data variables:
> > >     pm2p5_conc  (time, level) float32 59.14
> > > ```
> > {: .code-out}
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> ### {% icon comment %} Pixel size when averaging

> > We average over a relatively small so we do not make a weighted average. Use weighted averages when averaging over the entire globe or over a large area where the pixel sizes may vary (depending on the latitude).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We average over a relatively small area so we do not make a weighted average. Use weighted averages when averaging over the entire globe or over a large area where the pixel sizes may vary (depending on the latitude).
```

    - If your resampling frequency is lower than your original data, you would need to apply an operation on the data you group together, such as mean, min, max;
    - If your resampling frequency is higher than your original data, you would need to indicate how to fill the gaps, for instance, interpolate and indicate which interpolation method to apply or select nearest values, etc.

### 1 day Resampling
 
```python
print(dset.resample(time='1D').mean())
```

> ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> ```bash
> <xarray.Dataset>
> Dimensions:     (time: 5, longitude: 700, latitude: 400, level: 1)
> Coordinates:
>   * time        (time) timedelta64[ns] 0 days 1 days 2 days 3 days 4 days
>   * longitude   (longitude) float32 -24.95 -24.85 -24.75 ... 44.75 44.85 44.95
>   * latitude    (latitude) float32 69.95 69.85 69.75 69.65 ... 30.25 30.15 30.05
>   * level       (level) float32 0.0
> Data variables:
>     pm2p5_conc  (time, level, latitude, longitude) float32 0.4298 ... 7.501
> ```
{: .code-out}

### 30 minute resampling
 

```python
print(dset.resample(time='30min').interpolate('linear'))
```

> ### {% icon comment %} Be careful when sub-sampling!

> > Increasing the frequency of your data e.g. artificialy creating data may not be scientifically relevant. Please use carefuly! Interpolating is not always scientifically relevant and sometimes you may prefer to choose a different method, for instance to take the nearest value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Increasing the frequency of your data e.g. artificially creating data may not be scientifically relevant. Please use it carefully! Interpolating is not always scientifically relevant and sometimes you may prefer to choose a different method, like taking the nearest value for instance:
```

- 
  type: internal
  topic_name: data-science
  tutorials:
    - python-plotting
    - python-advanced-np-pd
- 
  type: "external"
  title: Data Carpentry Geospatial Workshop
  link: https://datacarpentry.org/geospatial-workshop/
follow_up_training:
- 
  type: "external"
  title: Pangeo Tutorial Gallery
  link: http://gallery.pangeo.io/repos/pangeo-data/pangeo-tutorial-gallery/index.html
- 
  type: "external"
  title: Pangeo Gallery
  link: http://gallery.pangeo.io/index.html
questions:
- What is Pangeo notebook?
- How to start Pangeo Notebook in Galaxy?
- What are the main software components of the Pangeo ecosystem?
- What is Xarray?
- How to manipulate Xarrays?
- How to print metadata information?
- How to make a selection?
- How to visualize?
- How to filter? 
- How to make reduction operations (mean, max, min)?
- How to resample my data?
- Where to go next?
objectives:
- Learn to get metadata information using Xarray Galaxy Tools
- Learn to select data
- Learn to visualize data
- Learn to filter, make reduction operations (mean, max, min)
- Learn to resample my data
- Learn to cite and contribute to Pangeo
time_estimation: 1H
key_points:
- Pangeo and Xarray

> - Read, select, mask and plot netCDF data using Xarray

Reviewer 2: Perhaps the key points could be explained a bit more.

Author: You are right. I will revise the key points and make them more explicit.

  - pangeo
  - interactive-tools
  - jupyter-notebook
contributors:
- annefou
notebook:
  language: python
  snippet: topics/climate/tutorials/pangeo-notebook/preamble.md
---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

In this tutorial, we will learn about [Xarray](https://xarray.pydata.org/), one of the most used Python library from the [Pangeo](https://pangeo.io/) ecosystem. 

We will be using data from [Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service](https://ads.atmosphere.copernicus.eu/)
and more precisely PM2.5 ([Particle Matter < 2.5 μm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Particulates#Size,_shape_and_solubility_matter)) 4 days forecast from December, 22 2021. Parallel data analysis with Pangeo is not covered in this tutorial. 

> ### {% icon comment %} Remark
>
> This tutorial uses data on a regular latitude-longitude grid. More complex and irregular grids are not discussed in this tutorial. In addition,
> this tutorial is not meant to cover all the different possibilities offered by Xarrays but shows functionalities we find useful for day to day
> analysis.
>
{: .comment}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Analysis

## Import Python packages

> Some packages may need to be installed first. For example `cmcrameri` is missing, so we need to do:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some packages may need to be installed first. For example `cmcrameri` is missing, so we need to open a terminal and install it:
```

```python
pip install cmcrameri
```

> then import all the necessary packages in your Jupyter Notebook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then re-execute the cell in your Jupyter Notebook. After that, we need to import all the necessary packages in our Jupyter Notebook.
```

```python
import numpy as np
import xarray as xr
import cartopy.crs as ccrs
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import cmcrameri.cm as cmc
import pandas as pd
```

> In case some packages cannot be imported you need to install them first. For example if cmcrameri is missing, open a terminal and type pip install cmcrameri, then re-execute the cell in your Jupyter Notebook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Ok. I am the one you talked about terminal. Defintiely a mistake! I need to update this part. Everything needs to be installed in the notebook so when we share the notebook it can be re-executed. I will update it! Thanks for spotting this!

> > 1. To get metadata information from `pm2p5_conc` Data variable, we use its variable name and print it. Printing it will only print metadata, not the values.
> >      - Variable name: `mass_concentration_of_pm2p5_ambient_aerosol_in_air`
> >      - Units: `µg/m3`
> >
> > > ### {% icon code-in %} Input: Python
> > > ```python
> > > print(dset.pm2p5_conc)
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> > > ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> > > ```bash
> > >    <xarray.DataArray 'pm2p5_conc' (time: 97, level: 1, latitude: 400, longitude: 700)>
> > >    [27160000 values with dtype=float32]
> > >    Coordinates:
> > >      * longitude  (longitude) float32 335.0 335.1 335.2 335.4 ... 44.75 44.85 44.95
> > >      * latitude   (latitude) float32 69.95 69.85 69.75 69.65 ... 30.25 30.15 30.05
> > >      * level      (level) float32 0.0
> > >      * time       (time) timedelta64[ns] 00:00:00 01:00:00 ... 4 days 00:00:00
> > >    Attributes:
> > >        species:        PM2.5 Aerosol
> > >        units:          µg/m3
> > >        value:          hourly values
> > >        standard_name:  mass_concentration_of_pm2p5_ambient_aerosol_in_air
> > > ```
> > {: .code-out}
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> > ### {% icon comment %} Different ways to access Data variables
> >
> > To access a variable or coordinate, we can use "." or specify its name as a string between squared brackets "[" "]". For example:
> 
> 
> ```python
> print(dset['pm2p5_conc'])
> ```
> 
> or 
> 
> ```python
> print(dset.pm2p5_conc)
> ```
> 
> When we print a variable or coordinate, we don't get all the individual values but a `DataArray` that contains a lot of very useful metadata such 
> as coordinates (if they have some), all the attributes such as the name, the physical units, etc.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ### {% icon comment %} Different ways to access Data variables
>
> To access a variable or coordinate, we can use "." or specify its name as a string between squared brackets "[" "]". For example:
>
> ```python
> print(dset['pm2p5_conc'])
> # or alternatively
> print(dset.pm2p5_conc)
> ```
> 
> When we print a variable or coordinate, we don't get all the individual values but a `DataArray` that contains a lot of very useful metadata such as coordinates (if they have some), all the attributes such as the name, the physical units, etc.
>
{: .comment}
```

> > > ```python
> > > print(dset.sel(time=(np.timedelta64(2,'D')+ np.timedelta64(12,'h'))))
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> > > ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> > > ```bash
> > > <xarray.Dataset>
> > > Dimensions:     (longitude: 700, latitude: 400, level: 1)
> > > Coordinates:
> > >   * longitude   (longitude) float32 -24.95 -24.85 -24.75 ... 44.75 44.85 44.95
> > >   * latitude    (latitude) float32 69.95 69.85 69.75 69.65 ... 30.25 30.15 30.05
> > >   * level       (level) float32 0.0
> > >     time        timedelta64[ns] 2 days 12:00:00
> > > Data variables:
> > >     pm2p5_conc  (level, latitude, longitude) float32 0.4499 0.4421 ... 10.71
> > > Attributes:
> > >     title:        PM25 Air Pollutant FORECAST at the Surface
> > >     institution:  Data produced by Meteo France
> > >     source:       Data from ENSEMBLE model
> > >     history:      Model ENSEMBLE FORECAST
> > >     FORECAST:     Europe, 20211222+[0H_96H]
> > >     summary:      ENSEMBLE model hourly FORECAST of PM25 concentration at the...
> > >     project:      MACC-RAQ (http://macc-raq.gmes-atmosphere.eu)
> > > ```
> > {: .code-out}
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

## Plotting

> - To plot a map, you need to select a variable with data on geographical coordinates (latitude, longitude).
> - In addition coordinates need to be sorted, and preferably in increasing order. This is not the case for the coordinate "longitude" which is given between 360 and 0. Let's shift the longitudes by 180 degrees so that they come in the range of -180 to 180.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To plot a map, you need to select a variable with data on geographical coordinates (latitude, longitude). In addition, coordinates need to be sorted, and preferably in increasing order. This is not the case for the coordinate "longitude" which is given between 360 and 0. 

Let's shift the longitudes by 180 degrees so that they come in the range of -180 to 180.
```

### Shift longitudes

We print the longitudes before and after shifting them so we can see what is happening.

```python
print(dset.longitude)
```

The longitude values are between `335.05` and `44.95` degrees.

Let's now shift the longitudes to get values between `-180`, `180` degrees.

```python
dset.coords['longitude'] = (dset['longitude'] + 180) % 360 - 180
print(dset.longitude)
```

Indeed, the longitudes have been shifted and now the values are between `-24.95` and `44.95`.

### Visualize on a map PM2.5 for December, 24th 2021 at 12:00 UTC

```python
dset.sel(time=(np.timedelta64(2,'D')+ np.timedelta64(12,'h'))).pm2p5_conc.plot()
```
We will get a figure like the one below:

> [CAMS PM2.5 December, 24th 2021 at 12:00 UTC](../../images/PM2_5_default.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![CAMS PM2.5 December, 24th 2021 at 12:00 UTC](../../images/PM2_5_default.png)
```

- Save figure into png

 ```python
fig = plt.figure(1, figsize=[15,10])
 
# We're using cartopy to project our data.
# (see documentation on cartopy)
ax = plt.subplot(1, 1, 1, projection=ccrs.Mercator())
ax.coastlines(resolution='10m')
  
# We need to project our data to the new projection and for this we use `transform`.
# we set the original data projection in transform (here PlateCarree)
dset.sel(time=(np.timedelta64(2,'D') + np.timedelta64(12,'h')))['pm2p5_conc'].plot(ax=ax, 
                                                                                    transform=ccrs.PlateCarree(),
                                                                                    vmin = 0, vmax = 35,
                                                                                    cmap=cmc.roma_r)
# One way to customize your title
plt.title("Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service PM2.5, 2 day forecasts\n 24th December 2021 at 12:00 UTC", fontsize=18)
plt.savefig("CAMS-PM2_5-fc-20211224.png")
```
>    {: .code-in}

And you should get the following plot:

![Customized plot for CAMS PM2.5 December, 24th 2021 at 12:00 UTC](../../images/CAMS-PM2_5-fc-20211224.png)

### Multi-plots

> - Here we would like to plot several times on the same figure in different sub-plots
> - We will not plots all the times (too many) but the first 24 forecasted values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, we will plot several times on the same figure in different sub-plots; we will not plot all the times (too many) but the first 24 forecasted values.
```

> 1. Make a list of times and convert to pandas datetime to make it easier to format times when plotting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Firstly, we need to create a list of times and convert it to `pandas datetime` in order to make it easier to format times when plotting:
```

 
```python
list_times = np.datetime64('2021-12-22') + dset.time.sel(time=slice(np.timedelta64(0),np.timedelta64(1,'D')))
print(pd.to_datetime(list_times).strftime("%d %b %H:%S UTC"))
```

> 2. We use the same plotting method as earlier, but we pass additional parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondly, we need to use the same plotting method as earlier, but we pass additional parameters:
```

>         - `vmin = 0`and `vmax = 35` to set the minimum and maximum values when plotting (this is useful to highlight features in your plot);
>         - `subplot_kws={"projection": proj_plot}` to project data on a non-default projection. See [cartopy projection](https://scitools.org.uk/cartopy/docs/v0.15/crs/projections.html) for more information about projections;
>         - `col='time'` because we will plot several `time`;
>         -  `col_wrap=4` to have a maximum of 4 plots per row. If we have more times to plot, then the next figures will be on another row;
>         - `robust=True` and `aspect=dset.dims["longitude"] / dset.dims["latitude"]` are additional parameters to make each subplot with a "sensible" figsize;
>         - `cmap=cmc.roma_r` to select a non-default and color-blind friendly colormap (see [scientific colormaps](https://www.fabiocrameri.ch/colourmaps/)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        
- `vmin = 0`and `vmax = 35` to set the minimum and maximum values when plotting (this is useful to highlight features in your plot)
- `subplot_kws={"projection": proj_plot}` to project data on a non-default projection. See [cartopy projection](https://scitools.org.uk/cartopy/docs/v0.15/crs/projections.html) for more information about projections.
- `col='time'` because we will plot several `time`;
-  `col_wrap=4` to have a maximum of 4 plots per row. If we have more times to plot, then the next figures will be on another row.
- `robust=True` and `aspect=dset.dims["longitude"] / dset.dims["latitude"]` are additional parameters to make each subplot with a "sensible" figsize.
- `cmap=cmc.roma_r` to select a non-default and color-blind friendly colormap (see [scientific colormaps](https://www.fabiocrameri.ch/colourmaps/)).
```

Reviewer 2: This bullet point list doesn't render correctly; I think that it will fix it.

                                                                                       vmin = 0, vmax = 35,
                                                                                       subplot_kws={"projection": proj_plot},
                                                                                       col='time', col_wrap=4,
                                                                                       robust=True,
                                                                                      aspect=dset.dims["longitude"] / dset.dims["latitude"],  # for a sensible figsize
                                                                                       cmap=cmc.roma_r)
# We have to set the map's options on our axes
for ax,i in zip(p.axes.flat,  (np.datetime64('2021-12-22') + dset.time.sel(time=slice(np.timedelta64(0),np.timedelta64(1,'D')))).values):
      ax.coastlines('10m')
      ax.set_title("CAMS PM2.5 " + pd.to_datetime(i).strftime("%d %b %H:%S UTC"), fontsize=12)
# Save your figure
plt.savefig("CAMS-PM2_5-fc-multi.png")
```

> In the second part of our plot, we customize each subplot (this is why we loop for each of them and get their axes) by adding:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the second part of our plot, we are going to customize each subplot (this is why we loop for each of them and get their axes) by adding:
```

>          -  `coastlines`: we pass a parameter `10m` to get coastlines with a high resolution (non-default);
>          - `set_title` to set a title for each subplot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

-  `coastlines`: we pass a parameter `10m` to get coastlines with a high resolution (non-default);
- `set_title` to set a title for each subplot.
```

> > >                                                                                      aspect=dset.dims["longitude"] / dset.dims["latitude"],  # for a sensible figsize
> > >                                                                                      cmap=cmc.roma_r)
> > > # We have to set the map's options on all axes
> > > for ax,i in zip(p.axes.flat,  (np.datetime64('2021-12-22') + dset.time.sel(time=slice(np.timedelta64(0),np.timedelta64(1,'D')))).values):
> > >     ax.coastlines('10m')
> > >     ax.set_title("CAMS PM2.5 " + pd.to_datetime(i).strftime("%d %b %H:%S UTC"), fontsize=12)
> > > # Save your figure
> > > plt.savefig("CAMS-PM2_5-fc-multi-Italy.png")
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> >  ![PM2.5 over Italy](../../images/CAMS-PM2_5-fc-multi-Italy.png)
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> ### {% icon comment %}  `latitude=slice(47.3, 36.5)` and not `latitude=slice(36.5, 47.3)`
> Why did we slice latitudes with `latitude=slice(47.3, 36.5)` and not `latitude=slice(36.5, 47.3)`?
> - because when using slice, you need to specify values using the same order as in the coordinates. Latitudes are specified in 
> decreasing order for CAMS.
>

> {: .comment}

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it could be included inside the previous question block?

Author: Ok. Yes, it is probably not possible to guess such things. I will look at it more carefully. Thanks.

> ## Where 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to use the **where** method 
```

> - Sometimes we may want to make more complex selections with criteria on the values of a given variable and not only on its coordinates. For this we use `where`.
> - For instance, we may want to only keep PM2.5 if values are greater than 25 μm.m-3 (or any threshold you would like to choose)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes we may want to make more complex selections with criteria on the values of a given variable and not only on its coordinates. For this purpose,  we use the `where` method. For instance, we may want to only keep PM2.5 if values are greater than 25 μm.m-3 (or any threshold you would like to choose).
```

### Mask values that do not meet a criteria with `Where`

```python
print(dset.where(dset['pm2p5_conc'] > 25))
```

> ### {% icon comment %} What happened?
> You may not see any changes but if you look carefuly at `pm2p5_conc` values, you will see many `nan`. In fact, we now have 
> `nan` values whenever the criteria within the `where` statement is not met e.g. when PM2.5 <= 25
>

> {: .comment}

Reviewer 2: This section is a bit confusiong.

Let's plot one time to better see what happened:

> ### Plotting with mask

Reviewer 2: Is this title necessary? Perhaps it could be included inside the coding block.

Author: I will check. Thanks.

 
```python

> fig = plt.figure(1, figsize=[15,10])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
######################
# Plotting with mask #
######################

fig = plt.figure(1, figsize=[15,10])
```

Reviewer 2: Perhaps something like that?

Author: Ok. Let's try it. Many thanks for your suggestion!

                                                                                     subplot_kws={"projection": proj_plot},
                                                                                     col='time', col_wrap=4,
                                                                                     robust=True,
                                                                                     aspect=dset.dims["longitude"] / dset.dims["latitude"],  # for a sensible figsize
                                                                                     cmap=cmc.roma_r)
# We have to set the map's options on all four axes
for ax,i in zip(p.axes.flat,  (np.datetime64('2021-12-22') + dset.time.sel(time=slice(np.timedelta64(0),np.timedelta64(1,'D')))).values):
     ax.coastlines('10m')
     ax.set_title("PM2.5 > 25 μm.m-3" + pd.to_datetime(i).strftime("%d %b %H:%S UTC"), fontsize=12)
# Save your figure
plt.savefig("CAMS-PM2_5-fc-multi-Italy-25.png")
```

![Multi-plot of PM2.5 over Italy with threshold at 25](../../images/CAMS-PM2_5-fc-multi-Italy-25.png)

## Reduction operations

> - We often want to compute the mean of all our dataset, or along a dimension (for instance time).
> - If you do not pass any argument to the operation then it is done over all dimension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We often want to compute the mean of all our datasets, or along a dimension (for instance time). If you do not pass any argument to the operation then it is done over all dimensions.
```

> ### Mean

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Details on the **mean** method
```

> When we do not specify any paramters, we get a single value

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we do not specify any parameters, we get a single value.
```

> >
> > > ### {% icon code-in %} Input: Python
> > > ```python
> > > dset_tmean = dset.sel(latitude=slice(43., 40.), longitude=slice(11.,15.)).max(dim=('latitude', 'longitude'))
> > > dset_tmean_max = dset_tmean.where(dset_tmean['pm2p5_conc'] == 59.13694382, drop=True)
> > > print(dset_tmean_max)
> > > ```
> > {: .code-in}
> > 
> > > ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> > > ```bash
> > > <xarray.Dataset>
> > > Dimensions:     (time: 1, level: 1)
> > > Coordinates:
> > >   * level       (level) float32 0.0
> > >   * time        (time) timedelta64[ns] 20:00:00
> > > Data variables:
> > >     pm2p5_conc  (time, level) float32 59.14
> > > ```
> > {: .code-out}
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> ### {% icon comment %} Pixel size when averaging
> We average over a relatively small so we do not make a weighted average. Use weighted averages when averaging over the entire globe or over a large area where the pixel sizes may vary (depending on the latitude).
>

> {: .comment}

Reviewer 2: Perhaps both questions could be included in a single question box?

> ## Resample

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Details on the **resample** method
```

> - We often want to resample (on time dimension) our data:
>     - if your resampling frequency is lower than your original data, you would need to apply an operation on the data you group together, such as mean, min, max;
>     - if your resampling frequency is higher than your original data, you would need to indicate how to fill the gaps, for instance interpolate and indicate which interpolation method to apply or select nearest values, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We often want to resample (on time dimension) our data:
    - If your resampling frequency is lower than your original data, you would need to apply an operation on the data you group together, such as mean, min, max;
    - If your resampling frequency is higher than your original data, you would need to indicate how to fill the gaps, for instance, interpolate and indicate which interpolation method to apply or select nearest values, etc.
```

> ### 1 day Resampling

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it could be included inside the code block.

Author: you mean as a comment in the code?

Reviewer 2: Yes, or perhaps fourth-level header (####)? Otherwise it is fine.

Author: I move each "comment" to the corresponding section (1 day reseampling and 30 mn resampling). I hope it makes it clearer.

 
```python
print(dset.resample(time='1D').mean())
```

> ### {% icon code-out %} Output
> ```bash
> <xarray.Dataset>
> Dimensions:     (time: 5, longitude: 700, latitude: 400, level: 1)
> Coordinates:
>   * time        (time) timedelta64[ns] 0 days 1 days 2 days 3 days 4 days
>   * longitude   (longitude) float32 -24.95 -24.85 -24.75 ... 44.75 44.85 44.95
>   * latitude    (latitude) float32 69.95 69.85 69.75 69.65 ... 30.25 30.15 30.05
>   * level       (level) float32 0.0
> Data variables:
>     pm2p5_conc  (time, level, latitude, longitude) float32 0.4298 ... 7.501
> ```
{: .code-out}

> ### 30 minute resampling

Reviewer 2: Also it.

  title: Data Carpentry Geospatial Workshop
  link: https://datacarpentry.org/geospatial-workshop/
follow_up_training:
- 
  type: "external"
  title: Pangeo Tutorial Gallery
  link: http://gallery.pangeo.io/repos/pangeo-data/pangeo-tutorial-gallery/index.html
- 
  type: "external"
  title: Pangeo Gallery
  link: http://gallery.pangeo.io/index.html
questions:
- What is Pangeo notebook?
- How to start Pangeo Notebook in Galaxy?
- What are the main software components of the Pangeo ecosystem?
- What is Xarray?
- How to manipulate Xarrays?
- How to print metadata information?
- How to make a selection?
- How to visualize?
- How to filter? 
- How to make reduction operations (mean, max, min)?
- How to resample my data?
- Where to go next?
objectives:
- Learn to get metadata information using Xarray Galaxy Tools
- Learn to select data
- Learn to visualize data
- Learn to filter, make reduction operations (mean, max, min)
- Learn to resample my data
- Learn to cite and contribute to Pangeo
time_estimation: 1H
key_points:
- Pangeo and Xarray
- Read, select, mask and plot netCDF data using Xarray
tags:
  - pangeo
  - interactive-tools
  - jupyter-notebook
contributors:
- annefou

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
notebook:
  language: python
```
